mask-image: examples and description (#39225)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/mask-image/index.md

  - : A {{cssxref("url_value", "&lt;url&gt;")}} reference to a {{SVGElement("mask")}} or to a CSS image.

- {{cssxref("&lt;image&gt;")}}
  - : An image value used as a mask image layer.

## Description

The `mask-image` property provides a mask that hides part of the element to which it is applied. The value is a comma-separated list of mask references. Each mask reference is an `<image>`, a `<mask-source>`, or the keyword `none`.

> The `<image>` can be any type of image, including generated images such as CSS [gradients](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/gradient).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `<image>` can be any type of image, including generated images such as [CSS gradients](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/gradient).
```

> The `none` keyword can be included at any point in a list of value. If there is only one value, and that value is `none`, no masking effect will be apparent. In a list of values, a `none` value may have no visual effect, but it means any other `mask-*` values in the same list-position will apply to a transparent black mask layer and have no visual effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If only one value is specified in the `mask-image` property value, and that value is `none`, no masking effect will be apparent. If multiple values are specified, a `none` value included in the list may have no direct effect, however, other `mask-*` values in the same list position will apply to a transparent black mask layer and have no visual effect.
```

Only image sources served over HTTP and HTTPS protocols are accepted as `<image>` values due to the [CORS](/en-US/docs/Glossary/CORS) policy. Images served locally, including relative or absolute `file://` protocols, are not accepted, and will render as transparent black. To test URL image sources locally, [set up a local server](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/CycleTracker/Secure_connection#localhost).

A mask will be counted as a transparent black image layer, not revealing anything, in the following cases:

- The mask image is empty (zero width or zero height).
- The mask image fails to download.
- The browser does not support the mask image format.
- The mask image doesn't exist.
- The mask value doesn't point to a mask image.

> The default value of the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property is `match-source`. This means the mode is defined by the mode of the mask image itself. The mode is generally `alpha` except if the mask source is an SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} element, in which case the mode is `luminance` unless the mode is changed to `alpha` via the CSS {{cssxref("mask-type")}} property or SVG {{svgattribute("mask-type")}} attribute. The `mask-mode` is relevant, because it determines whether the masking effect depends on the image source's alpha channel values alone or a combination of those and the mask's luminance, or lightness / darkness of the colors that make up the `mask-image`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default value of the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property is `match-source`, which means the mode is defined by the mode of the mask image itself. The mask image's mode is generally `alpha` except when the mask source is an SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} element, in which case the mode is `luminance` unless the mode is changed to `alpha` via the CSS {{cssxref("mask-type")}} property or SVG {{svgattribute("mask-type")}} attribute.

The `mask-mode` value is significant, because it determines whether the masking effect depends on the image source's alpha channel values alone or a combination of those and the mask's luminance (the lightness/darkness of the colors that make up the `mask-image`):
```

Reviewer: Also, the `{{svgattribute("mask-type")}}` macro doesn't work.

- In all cases, the alpha transparency of the mask matters; element areas masked by opaque sections of the `mask-image` will be rendered, while areas masked by transparent image sections are hidden.
- When the `mask-mode` value is set or resolves to `alpha`, only the alpha-channel of the colors matter; the hue, lightness, etc., don't matter.

> - If the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property is set or defaults to `luminance`, the masking value is the luminance value of each color multiplied by its alpha value. The `mask-mode` will resolve to `luminance` if explicitly set to that value, or if the property is set to `match-source` and the `mask-image` source is an SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} that does not have its {{cssxref("mask-type")}} property or{{svgattribute("mask-type")}} attribute explicitly set to `alpha`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the `mask-mode` property is set or defaults to `luminance`, the masking value is the luminance value of each color multiplied by its alpha value. The `mask-mode` will resolve to `luminance` if explicitly set to that value, or if the property is set to `match-source` and the `mask-image` source is an SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} that does not have its {{cssxref("mask-type")}} property or {{svgattribute("mask-type")}} attribute explicitly set to `alpha`.
```

Reviewer: Again, the `{{svgattribute("mask-type")}}` macro doesn't work, needs fixing.

## Examples

### Gradient as a mask image

In this example, we use an `<image>` value as a mask, defining a CSS radial gradient as our mask image to create a round image with a soft edge.

#### HTML

We include an HTML {{htmlelement("img")}} element, which will also be used in all other examples.

```html
<img
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/progress-pride-flag.jpg"
  alt="Pride flag" />
```

#### CSS

We use the CSS {{CSSxRef("gradient/radial-gradient")}} function to create a mask.

```css
img {

>   mask-image: radial-gradient(black 50%, transparent 55%);

Reviewer: I think slightly less subtle values might make it easier to see the effect of the mask, like 50% and 70%?

Also, maybe show the unmasked equivalent next to the masked equivalent to allow users to compare and contrast, or provide a checkbox to turn the mask on and off?

Author: displayed the image before the example. Explained the gradient, but not showing it.

}
```

#### Results

{{EmbedLiveSample("Gradient as a mask image", "100%", 250)}}

### Image resource as a mask image

In this example, the `<mask-source>` used as our mask image is an external SVG.

#### HTML

> We include the same image as the previous example. We've also included the image we will be using as the mask.

Reviewer: I'd just show the JPG `<img>` element — it is not much code, and it might save a bit of confusion (when I first got here, I thought "huh, where's the other image?"; it took me a couple of seconds)

```html hidden
<img
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/progress-pride-flag.jpg"
  alt="Pride flag" />
```

```html
<img
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/mask-star.svg"
  alt="A star" />
```

#### CSS

> We use the `mask-star.svg` as our mask image on our first image only:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use `mask-star.svg` as a mask image on our first image:
```

Reviewer: Saying "only" kind of implies that we could've used it as the mask on our second image, but the second image is our mask image!

```css
img:first-of-type {
  mask-image: url(https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/mask-star.svg);
}
```

#### Results

{{EmbedLiveSample("Image resource as a mask image", "100%", 250)}}

> The mask is semi-opaque, which is why the colors are not as vibrant as the previous example.

Reviewer: Maybe explain "The mask is semi-opaque" a bit more — the opacity is set in the SVG image, correct, and not due to some kind of CSS mask setting?

The mask is smaller than the image, so repeats by default. We could have used {{cssxref("mask-repeat")}} to control the repeating or {{cssxref("mask-size")}} to change the size of the mask, which we do in the next example.

### Multiple masks

This example demonstrates applying multiple masks.

```html hidden
<img
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/progress-pride-flag.jpg"
  alt="Pride flag" />
```

#### CSS

> We apply the same semi-transparent SVG as in the previous example, and add a {{CSSxRef("gradient/repeating-radial-gradient")}}. We control the size of the masks using the {{cssxref("mask-size")}} property. Because our first mask is not 100%, we make sure our masks are centered and don't repeat with the {{cssxref("mask-position")}} and {{cssxref("mask-repeat")}} properties, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We apply two masks — the same semi-transparent SVG as in the previous example, and a {{CSSxRef("gradient/repeating-radial-gradient")}}. We control the size of the masks using the {{cssxref("mask-size")}} property. Because our first mask is not 100%, we make sure our masks are centered and don't repeat with the {{cssxref("mask-position")}} and {{cssxref("mask-repeat")}} properties, respectively.
```

```css
img {
  mask-size: 95%, 100%;
  mask-position: center;
  mask-repeat: no-repeat;
  mask-image:
    url(https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/mask-star.svg),
    repeating-radial-gradient(transparent 0 5px, black 5px 10px);
}
```

#### Results

{{EmbedLiveSample("multiple masks", "100%", 250)}}

### Masking with SVG `<mask>`

> This example demonstrates using SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} elements as masks. In this case, the color of the mask matters as {{cssxref("mask-type")}} for SVG masks defaults to `luminance` .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates using SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} elements as masks. In this case, the color of the mask matters as the {{cssxref("mask-type")}} value for SVG masks defaults to `luminance`.
```

#### HTML

> We included an `id` for each of our four images, and an SVG that contains and equal number of `<mask>` elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've included an `id` for each of our four images, and an SVG that contains an equal number of `<mask>` elements.
```

  alt="Pride flag" />
<img
  id="both"
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/progress-pride-flag.jpg"
  alt="Pride flag" />
<img
  id="alphaMode"
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/progress-pride-flag.jpg"
  alt="Pride flag" />

<svg height="0" width="0">
  <mask id="greenMask">
    <path
      d="M20,70 A40,40,0,0,1,100,70 A40,40,0,0,1,180,70 Q180,130,100,190 Q20,130,20,70 Z"
      fill="green" />
  </mask>
  <mask id="strokeMask">
    <path
      d="M20,70 A40,40,0,0,1,100,70 A40,40,0,0,1,180,70 Q180,130,100,190 Q20,130,20,70 Z"
      fill="none"
      stroke="white"
      stroke-width="20" />
  </mask>
  <mask id="bothMask">
    <path
      d="M20,70 A40,40,0,0,1,100,70 A40,40,0,0,1,180,70 Q180,130,100,190 Q20,130,20,70 Z"
      fill="grey"
      stroke="white"
      stroke-width="20" />
  </mask>
  <mask id="black">
    <path
      d="M20,70 A40,40,0,0,1,100,70 A40,40,0,0,1,180,70 Q180,130,100,190 Q20,130,20,70 Z"
      fill="black" />
  </mask>
</svg>
```

```html hidden
<p>
  <label>
    <input type="checkbox" />
    Set the <code>mask-mode</code> to <code>alpha</code>.
  </label>
</p>
```

#### CSS

> We apply a different `<mask>` to each `<img>`. No part of the last image will be visible by default because, in this case, while all colors used in this example are fully opaque, the `mask-mode` defaults to `match-type` which resolves to `luminance` in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We apply a different `<mask>` to each `<img>`. No part of the last image will be visible by default because, in this case, while all colors used in this example are fully opaque, the `mask-mode` defaults to `match-type`, which resolves to `luminance` in this case.
```

Reviewer: This still doesn't explain to me _why_ this means the last image is not visible. More explanation is needed here.

Author: Added some more explanation. Working on mask-mode page, so that will also have more info.

```css
#green {
  mask-image: url(#greenMask);
}
#stroke {
  mask-image: url(#strokeMask);
}
#both {
  mask-image: url(#bothMask);
}
#alphaMode {
  mask-image: url(#black);
}

body:has(:checked) img {
  mask-mode: alpha;
}
```

#### Results

> {{EmbedLiveSample("SVG elements as masks", "100%", 500)}}

Reviewer: You might want to increase the height of the live example just slightly, to avoid a vertical scroll bar in Firefox.

  alt="Pride flag" />
<img
  id="both"
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/progress-pride-flag.jpg"
  alt="Pride flag" />
<img
  id="alphaMode"
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/progress-pride-flag.jpg"
  alt="Pride flag" />

<svg height="0" width="0">
  <mask id="greenMask">
    <path
      d="M20,70 A40,40,0,0,1,100,70 A40,40,0,0,1,180,70 Q180,130,100,190 Q20,130,20,70 Z"
      fill="green" />
  </mask>
  <mask id="strokeMask">
    <path
      d="M20,70 A40,40,0,0,1,100,70 A40,40,0,0,1,180,70 Q180,130,100,190 Q20,130,20,70 Z"
      fill="none"
      stroke="white"
      stroke-width="20" />
  </mask>
  <mask id="bothMask">
    <path
      d="M20,70 A40,40,0,0,1,100,70 A40,40,0,0,1,180,70 Q180,130,100,190 Q20,130,20,70 Z"
      fill="green"
      stroke="white"
      stroke-width="20" />
  </mask>
  <mask id="black">
    <path
      d="M20,70 A40,40,0,0,1,100,70 A40,40,0,0,1,180,70 Q180,130,100,190 Q20,130,20,70 Z"
      fill="black" />
  </mask>
</svg>
```

```html hidden
<p>
  <label>
    <input type="checkbox" />
    Set the <code>mask-mode</code> to <code>alpha</code>.
  </label>
</p>
```

#### CSS

> We apply a different `<mask>` to each `<img>`. No part of the last image, with the `black` fill, will be visible by default because, in this case, while all colors used in this example are fully opaque, the `mask-mode` defaults to `match-type`, which resolves to `luminance` in this case.

Reviewer: Too long, and too many commas, hard to read.

```css
#green {
  mask-image: url(#greenMask);
}
#stroke {
  mask-image: url(#strokeMask);
}
#both {
  mask-image: url(#bothMask);
}
#alphaMode {
  mask-image: url(#black);
}

body:has(:checked) img {
  mask-mode: alpha;
}
```

> The luminance value of `black` is `0`, white is `100`, and [`green` is `46.228`](https://www.colorhexa.com/008000). This means the areas where the mask is white wll be visible, where the mask is black or fully transparent will be clipped (not visible), and where the mask is green will be visible but lighter; green areas will be masked the equivalent of having a white mask that is 46.228% opaque set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The luminance values of `black`, `white`, and `green` are `0`, `100`, and [`46.228`](https://www.colorhexa.com/008000), respectively. This means the areas where the mask is white will be visible, whereas areas where the mask is black or fully transparent will be clipped (not visible). Areas where the mask is green will be visible but lighter, equivalent to having a white mask that is 46.228% opaque.
```

#### Results

{{EmbedLiveSample("SVG elements as masks", "100%", 540)}}

> Toggle the checkbox to toggle the value of last image's `mask-mode` between `alpha` (checked) and the initial value which resolves to `luminance` (unchecked). When `alpha` is used, the color of the mask doesn't matter; all that matters is the alpha-transparency. When the value resolves to `luminance`, `white` areas are visible, `black` areas are not, and `green` areas are visible but at an opacity that matches the luminance of the color `green`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toggle the checkbox to toggle the value of the last image's `mask-mode` between `alpha` (checked) and the initial value, which resolves to `luminance` (unchecked). When `alpha` is used, the color of the mask doesn't matter; all that matters is the alpha-transparency. When the value resolves to `luminance`, `white` areas are visible, `black` areas are not, and `green` areas are visible but at an opacity that matches the luminance of the color `green`.
```

      fill="black" />
  </mask>
</svg>
```

```html hidden
<p>
  <label>
    <input type="checkbox" />
    Set the <code>mask-mode</code> to <code>alpha</code>.
  </label>
</p>
```

#### CSS

We apply a different `<mask>` to each `<img>`. No part of the last image, with the `black` fill, will be visible by default. In this case, while all colors used in this example are fully opaque, the `mask-mode` defaults to `match-type`, which resolves to `luminance` in this case.

```css
#green {
  mask-image: url(#greenMask);
}
#stroke {
  mask-image: url(#strokeMask);
}
#both {
  mask-image: url(#bothMask);
}
#alphaMode {
  mask-image: url(#black);
}

body:has(:checked) img {
  mask-mode: alpha;
}
```

The luminance values of `black`, `white`, and `green` are `0`, `100`, and [`46.228`](https://www.colorhexa.com/008000), respectively. This means the areas where the mask is white will be visible, whereas areas where the mask is black or fully transparent will be clipped (not visible). Areas where the mask is green will be visible but lighter, equivalent to having a white mask that is 46.228% opaque.

#### Results

{{EmbedLiveSample("SVG elements as masks", "100%", 540)}}

> Toggle the checkbox to toggle the value of the `mask-mode` between `alpha` (checked) and the initial value, which resolves to `luminance` (unchecked). When `alpha` is used, the color of the mask doesn't matter; all that matters is the alpha-transparency. When the value resolves to `luminance`, `white` areas are visible, `black` areas are not, and `green` areas are visible but at an opacity that matches the luminance of the color `green`. When set to `alpha`, `white`, `black`, and `green` are equivalent as they are all fully opaque color values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toggle the checkbox to toggle the value of the `mask-mode` between `alpha` (checked) and the initial value, which resolves to `luminance` (unchecked). When `alpha` is used, the color of the mask doesn't matter; all that matters is the alpha-transparency. When the value resolves to `luminance`, `white` areas are visible, `black` areas are not, and `green` areas are visible but at an opacity that matches the luminance of the color `green`. When `mask-mode` is set to `alpha`, the colors are equivalent as they are all fully opaque.
```
